you're the former World barista champion
so we have cups of coffee here from
different suppliers so coffee number one
yeah I'd be surprised if that was
expensive I'd be a little bit outraged
if that was
expensive that's kind of weird that's
really
interesting if you want the best
experience for coffee this one I can
reveal that is James hofman the most
famous people in the world when it comes
to Coffee News has close to 2 million
subscribers on YouTube the most popular
piece of coffee bro casting on the
planet you've committed a huge portion
of your life to Coffee what advice have
you got for me okay London has some of
the best coffee shops in the world don't
get an expressing machine for home
coffee pods they're a microwave meal how
long does it take to Decay the minute
you open that bag it's on its way out
and it will happen really quickly you
walk into the Starbucks what you order
if I'm being fully weird be fully weird
fine then I'm going to say I've got 100
for the Machinery coffee grinders are
the right investment they are more
important than the machine what what's
your favorite cup of coffee if I'm
honest it is I'll be addicted it's the
world's most popular psychoactive drug
but you look at the science coffee seems
to be healthy and have a really positive
impact wherever it's been measured it's
a great source of fiber it is like
having another vegetable in the diet
people tend to perform better on
cognitive tests it looks like coffee
drinkers survive longer the problem with
it is that coffee has this really
depressing future
why quick one this is really really
fascinating to me on the back end of our
YouTube channel it says that
69.9% of you that watch this channel
frequently over the lifetime of this
channel haven't yet hit the Subscribe
button I just wanted to ask you a favor
it helps this channel so much if you
choose to just subscribe helps us scale
the guess helps us scale the production
and it makes this show bigger so if I
could ask you for one favor if you've
watched the show before and you've
enjoyed it and you like this episode
that you're currently watching could you
please hit the Subscribe button thank
you so much and I will repay that
gesture by making sure that everything
we do here gets better and better and
better and better that is a promise I'm
willing to make you do we have a
[Music]
deal James you've committed a huge
portion of your
life to a drink to a bean to Coffee yeah
why uh I love it it brings me intense
pleasure like the whole thing I think I
fell in love with it 20 years ago and uh
I working in wine people get falling in
love with wine right like people with
the drink with the culture with where
it's grown all that stuff the same can
be true with coffee and turned out to be
true for me and I'm uh kind of obsessed
with learning and coffee is so big
people see it as kind of Niche what I do
is a a niche but it's this Global thing
it's in every culture there's everything
from botany to science to like Health
all the rest of it's wrapped in this one
thing so I can spend lifetimes learning
about it and never be done it it it's
just huge fun and it's one of those
things that's capable of incredible
surprise people's expectations of coffee
are very low often and and when you kind
of show them what it can be that's a
very satisfying moment that never gets
tiring cuz I just thought of coffee as a
drink that everyone seems to be pretty
addicted to but I imagine your
perspective on on that is a little bit
more um artistic and expansive I mean
yes and no coffee's existence kind of
blows my mind there a thing that we all
do that for over a 100 years now it's
been normal to have the ground up seeds
of a tropical fruit plant just sitting
in your cupboard and you're going to
steep that in water and drink it that's
a weird human thing that we do and it's
just been a part of everyone's lives for
as long as they can remember coffee is
just there but it turns out in sort of
the last 20 years we've had this boom of
specialty coffee where we've kind of um
showcased how interesting it can be you
know it's not just this commoditized
thing and I think that bit has sort of
changed consumption around the world now
actually I see in every country you know
people's opinions and expect ation of
coffee have shifted massively when I
first started drinking coffee which I
think I was quite late to coffee and I
think I'm quite a a low-level consumer
of coffee part of the reason I was put
off drinking coffee was because it
appears that the entirety of society are
addicted to it and it might have this
sort of first principal belief that
anything that has a significant upside
must come with a significant downside
sure and and no one can tell me what the
downside was so I was just very
reluctant to engage in an addiction when
I can see the up side I can see people
are more focused they seem to be higher
in energy that's the appearance I have
but the the downside was never clear we
are addicted aren't we do you know I
don't like that word no no this you know
it's um yeah it's the world's most
popular psychoactive drug it is the most
widely consumed psychoactive drug yes I
would say it's absolutely bound itself
into society now it are we addicted yeah
I mean addiction is complicated and I'm
not an expert on addiction I would say
there's a level of dependency if you
stop drinking caffeine you will suffer
for 24 to 48 hours and it might be a
kind of big old headache it might be
something else so you know you will uh
have symptoms if you stop consuming it
but you can stop consuming coffee and
then go for years without an urge to
consume it again so I wouldn't say
addiction is quite the right word for it
but yeah we are I would say deeply
dependent on it have you ever stopped
drinking it for a prolonged period of
time not for a prolonged period of time
it's pretty hard for me not to uh sort
of consume in doing what I do like
there's just a need to taste a need to
you know drink the stuff I've stopped
over period I've gone sick I've gone a
week or two without it but um I've
changed my attitude to caffeine
generally I'm I'm much more careful
around it because I think it is worthy
of concern the amount of caffeine you
consume like I'm very Pro coffee I want
people to drink and enjoy coffee but at
the same time I I am very nervous to
encourage caffeine consumption that
might be excessive because that's
definitely not good for you why sleep
like ultimately anything in this world
that interrupts your sleep perhaps with
the exception of children is probably to
be avoided right like Sleep Quality for
every outcome be it you know uh body
composition longevity all the rest of it
like cognition uh sleep's so important
and I feel like we we didn't culturally
prioritize the Sleep the way we are
beginning to now you know I think more
and more people are talking about the
importance of sleep and it's really easy
to get into a cycle uh with caffeine of
drinking too much coffee in the day you
have poor quality sleep you're tired the
next day I'll fix that with more
caffeine which will give you lower
quality sleep at night and that cycle
can go on and on and on I think that's
very that's a bad thing basically I
would say that's to be avoided so I'm
Pro cutting off caffeine early if you
suffer with it in any way and there's
enough ways to track your sleep these
days I feel like everything's tracking
our sleep so you can tell if you've had
a bad night's sleep and if you drank
coffee late maybe don't do that anymore
because you know caffeine has about a 5H
hour
halflife so you know even 10 hours after
you drank a cup of coffee there's still
a decent amount floating around in your
system enough that might you know delay
on set of sleep or reduce the quality of
your sleep isn't it Bonkers that people
offer you an espresso after dinner in
restaurants I don't I don't get it for
some people they find it very calming
and they really enjoy it they love it
they have no issues sleeping I cannot
touch caffeine after like 3: p.m. I have
like a hard cut off and I'm done um but
yeah I find the that you know there's
the idea that it's a Digest a I'm not
sure that's super well evidenced uh to
be honest having looked into it anyway
but if people enjoy it I'm not going to
get in the way of it but for and some
people sleep like a baby afterwards I
always amazed by those people that were
like yeah I have coffee I got to sleep
like how how and there's big genetic
differences and I think we we've started
to see those and you can get genetic
tests done that will give you an idea of
your uh caffeine metabolizer kind of
rate are you slow are you fast but um
yeah it's it's it's one of those weird
things things where because how coffees
made can impact the quantity of caffeine
in the end cup you can't accurately
predict how much caffeine's in a coffee
from a coffee shop right there's a bunch
of variables that can happen that will
produce a pretty big variance so this
incredibly popular drug we don't know
how much we're taking most of the time
which I think is kind of wild uh and
maybe not a good thing and so I'm I'm
kind of pro mindful consumption of this
stuff if that makes sense like uh just
be aware of it and thoughtful about it
and still enjoy it I want people to
drink and enjoy coffee but I I want as
much upside as possible as little
downside use the word drug there with
drugs you get a sort of Tolerance that
requires you to have more and more of
the thing to get to the same levels of I
don't know
psychoactiv is that the same with coffee
where if I have one coffee today in a
couple of months time I'm going to need
two to get to the same level of like
alertness yes and no
uh it seems to be that the benefits that
we see of caffeine when it comes to
cognition uh Disappear With habitual
usage and actually adding more doesn't
change it that first coffee that feels
so good is taking as sort of instead of
going from zero to one it's taking us
from minus one to zero it's removing the
kind of withdrawal symptom almost and
bringing us back to a kind of level of
like okay I'm here now and so if you
really really want maximum benefit from
caffeine be it cognition or sports or
anything else then actually having a
period without coffee beforehand will
give you the sort of greatest benefit
afterwards so there's a habituation I
guess but it doesn't escalate the way
the drugs do like you you don't need to
suddenly be drinking six eight 10 cups
of coffee to have an effect you'll just
feel weird uh so yeah a little bit
though again going back to my first
principles one of my first principles in
life generally and this is why I often
avoid medicine paracetamol you name it I
will I'd rather take the headache than
than start dabbling because I always
think that there's a cost to something
when I think about the way we live our
lives in society we literally many
people will have three or four cups of
coffee a day some people even more some
people will just drink coffee all the
way through the day throughout work and
then have one on their way home from
work as well and I look at that
objectively and go that's Insanity that
this sort of the entire Western
population is just like caffeinating
themselves just to function and then you
hear phrases like I like um oh I can't
function I can't function I've not had
my coffee yet mhm
and I just go this is you
know but I don't know enough about
coffee to understand if that's just you
know maybe there is a free lunch as it
relates to coffee or maybe sleep is the
only I think sleep's the primary concern
you know if you and if you're not
suffering any issues with sleep from
your coffee consumption then you know if
you look at the science I'm not a
scientist I really I like to read the
research papers but I'm not doing the
research but uh on almost every front
coffee seems to be healthy and have a
really positive impact wherever it's
been measured and across a whole range
of different stuff so you know as to why
caffeine's one part of it I think the
fact that coffee contains a surprising
amount of fiber is another one or the
quantity of polyphenols in there if
you're interested in the gut microbiome
like coffee seems to be really good for
that and I think we know more and more
the microbiome you know Tim Spectre has
taught us all the importance of that
that it impact Us in so many different
ways so on almost any front if you've
researched is coffee good for you know
longevity yes you see a reduction or
cause mortality that correlates to
Coffee consumption is it good for uh
cognitive decline yes you tend to see
coffee consumption associated with uh
less cognitive decline in old age or
liver function Cancer all of these
things seem to have a positive
association with coffee drinking but if
it's messing with you sleep I don't
think it's worth it that's just me
that's the the line for me of like it's
not such an incred incedible benefit
that that is worth the loss of Sleep
Quality mhm yeah sleep has become just
the most sort of the biggest Obsession
in my life over the last year I think
for all of us I think it's it's just if
you pay attention to this stuff you
can't help but begin to obsess over it I
hope healthily you know so to avoid the
impact of coffee impacting on sleep you
think the best thing to do is because
I've just not been drinking coffee after
like 1 p.m. great okay I think that's a
pretty good way to go I think decaf is
still a good option I think people kind
of really negative about decaf because
we have this caffeine first association
with coffee a lot of people like why
would I drink decaf what's the point you
know you see a lot of death before decaf
or whatever but I think decaf can be
really tasty which is good like it's a
nice delicious hot drink and also yeah
it's a little bit less of the downside
if you are concerned about caffeine I'm
so I'm so compar you and Tim Spectre are
the two people that have made the case I
think the first time I spoke to Tim
Spectre about coffee he was a little bit
on the fence as to whether it was
healthy or not he came back a second in
time and I think there's been
a little bit of a shift in him he's now
Pro coffee in terms of the gut
microbiome which I thought was super
interesting he says it counts as one of
my 30 fruit vegetables a week that I
need to get which was really surprising
so I helped my gut microbiome he talked
about the longevity impacts as well
which I thought was staggering that it
can the studies seem to show that it
will extend your life yeah it's a
reduction and all cause mortality so
you're just less likely to die early I
suppose is the easiest way to think
about it or that's what we see from the
studies and it's not that the studies
aren't without flaws but there's been a
lot now and you tend to see people dying
less often or less early uh when they
drink more coffee not a huge amount of
coffee and this is a if you ever go into
the research this is really important uh
a cup of coffee to you or me might look
like this a cup of coffee to a
researcher is 120 Ms of coffee which is
about half of this so you'll see loads
of studies say three cups of coffee
three cups of coffee is when you see
these benefits that's not a liter of
coffee that's more like 3 to 400 Ms
total a day of say filter coffee or one
or two or three espressos single
espressos so the the definition of a a
cup from all these studies is really
confusing and problematic and I think
encourages excess coffee consumption uh
but yeah three cups of coffee for heart
disease for all sorts of things is is is
seen to be associated with an
improvement in outcome why might that be
what is it about the bean the coffee
bean that is causing health benefits
that's probably above my pay grade I
would I would probably at this point I'm
probably aligned with Tim in that it's a
great source of fiber and polyenals that
it's just it is like having another
vegetable into the diet it's more
diversity of diet uh I think one study
showed that for some people in the US
like cups of filter coffee were their
primary source of dietary fiber now
that's kind of wild and not really how
things should be but it is a significant
source of fiber if you think about it
that way you know a large cup might be
three grams of fiber which doesn't seem
like much until you start tracking your
fiber intake and you realize oh that's a
that's a a decent contribution for a
drink um so yeah I think that's the
biggest part of it I don't think
caffeine has been shown to be
neuroprotective necessarily so I think
people are trying to understand the
mechanism more caffeine's been studied
separately and is much easier to study
because you can dose it you can look at
the effect of that to really do a study
on coffee
consumption is really hard you can't
really do a randomized control trial
where you raise people from say 15 to 60
years old you control their diet
exercise sleep and you just randomize
the coffee consumption because then you
might see something you could really say
coffee is good or bad we can just look
at these large epidemiological studies
and say well trying to control for diet
and exercise and cigarettes and all
these other things it looks like coffee
drinkers survive longer or have less
issues and it might just be that healthy
people are just attracted to Coffee we
don't really know which which way around
that is there's no strong mechanism but
at this point I'd probably be aligned
with with Tim on this one that I think
it's primarily going to be the gut the
fiber Point's super interesting because
he said to me that we're like as a
society extremely fiber deficient yes I
think the number he said that we needed
was about 20 is it grams of fiber a day
I think so yeah so if coffee is giving
us three or four of those grams that's
almost sort of 25% of our um requirement
which is pretty
staggering and I never really thought of
coffee as a source of fiber neither did
I until he told me I it just didn't
cross my mind that this you know it's
it's a drink how you know it's not like
a thick I lived the life of like fiber
is is miserable cardboard Brown cereal
that's fiber in my brain and the idea
that this was fiber was inconceivable to
me but you know then I read the studies
and uh it was fascinating what about
mental health I've always wondered you
know even things like depression anxiety
I've always assumed a little bit that
coffee because of the caffeine is going
to be bad for anxiety I would certainly
say not a doctor but I would certainly
say that if you someone suffers with
anxiety cutting out caffeine would be
something to test and to see if there's
benefits to cutting caffeine out the
there are a bunch of studies done on it
they're not uniform in their outcome
some found different results for caffine
consumption and I think because you're
trying to study what is ultimately quite
a generic term that covers a lot of
different experiences and and uh
challenges that people face so yeah I I
wouldn't say
consume it regardless don't think about
it I think if you struggle with anxiety
it would be certainly be worth
considering cutting it out what about
depression I think the same sort of
thing is true there I I think there have
been studies that correlate caffeine
consumption to depression I think there
are people who have used it and have
found benefit from it again it's one of
those ones where I I just wouldn't
blindly consume caffeine assuming a
benefit to mental health if I have
mental health challenges I think it's
it's a place to check and it's pretty
easy to check cut out for a month it'll
suck for a few days but you know you may
see benefits or you may not but another
sort of complicated tenous uh link has
been made towards cancer with coffee mhm
most of the meta studies now seem to
come down on for almost every Cancer
there's a lower incident associated with
coffee consumption this that again
that's not Universal some Studies have
found differently again they're just
really hard studies to do effectively I
think I think that's the challenge of it
I have certainly not seen any anything
that makes me uh concerned about
drinking coffee uh from that perspective
anyway I think there's a you know
whatever impact it may have I think
would be pretty minor compared to
something like uh cigarettes and I you
know I remember I think you said on the
internet some time ago uh you think in
in 10 or 20 years time people will see
coffee consumption the way they see
cigarette consumption yeah I did I
remember saying that two years ago yeah
and I and I think to some extent there's
something in that I I think we are
getting more thoughtful about caffeine
consumption and I think caffeine is
going to be the root of it all rather
than coffee as a whole yeah that's what
I should have said I should have said
caffeine and and I think there is change
and I think you know we're definitely
seeing that I don't think I think
there's enough health benefits in the
coffee itself MH that we would benefit
from keeping it around you know I don't
think there's any health benefits
associated with cigarette smoking but I
I think coffee will have some benefits
but I think our attitude and our
relationship with caffeine is going to
change I think you're right about that
yeah that's what I was getting at I I I
almost didn't dis couldn't pull apart
coffee from caffeine because I'm a
muggle on this subject matter but what I
really mean is that addiction to this
drug of caffeine and how it's like
running everyone's life and we need
three cups or four cups a day just to be
normal and to show up to work and think
straight I go Jesus Christ like as is
always the case with these sort of
Health revolutions we kind of go to one
extreme then we go to the other there's
the counter movement there'll be like
the big decaf movement there's now
because of neurod divers and anxiety
concerns there's this jitter-free
crashfree caffeine movement emerging in
things like matcha and Etc so H is decaf
is are you seeing a rise in people
choosing decaf and the great frustration
of decaf is that decaf drinkers are
typically very poorly served by the
coffee industry okay for a bunch of
reasons coffee shop owners tend not to
invest in decaf uh a lot of coffee
roasting companies don't really care
about decaf despite the fact that
drinkers are the ones who are drinking
it just for the taste they are the
purest coffee consumer actually cuz they
just want the flavor they don't even
want the caffeine just the flavor this
so you know it's always been an
important thing for me over the years uh
that decaf be good but yeah I'd love to
see more decaf consumption going on I I
I think decf can be really delicious and
good if it's done properly all the way
through from sort of farm to cup but
it's it's not as available as it should
be to most people which kind of hurts me
what about um Alzheimer's randomly
something I've got increasingly more
interested in over the last couple of
years I think from doing this podcast
and speaking to health experts but it it
has almost felt like this mystery
disease that strikes some people for a
reason that we haven't quite yet figured
out perfectly healthy people can
suddenly get the news that they have
Alzheimer's is there a relationship from
the studies that you've seen between
Alzheimer's um and coffee yes and I'm
going to sound like a broken record
where you see once again up to about
three cups of coffee a day saw an
association with reduced cognitive
decline in reduced incidents of
Alzheimer's so it's uh again I'm not
saying that coffee is causing this I'm
saying in the studies the people who
drank coffee had better outcomes but you
can't just say because they drank coffee
that's a really important disconnect in
these kind of things that doesn't happen
often
enough I had um Dr Daniel aan on the
podcast and one of his he's like a
neuroscientist that scans I think he
scanned a quarter of a million brains
now he is one of the only people that
has really expressed a concern about the
impact that coffee has on the brain
because he says it reduces the amount of
blood flow to the brain MH and that is a
net negative thing have you ever heard
about that that point of view before I
haven't heard much about that most of
the studies I've read that looked at
cognition see that kind of lift that
caffeine will give you um in that you
know people tend to perform better on
cognitive tests after caffine than or
with caffeine than without um I'm
surprised in that I I had thought
caffeine was a v dilator which would in
theory allow more blood flow around but
maybe it's not you know I haven't
scanned a quarter million brains uh so
I'm not an expert on this one but that's
the first time I've heard someone talk
about blood flow to the brain and coffee
specifically you know I used to believe
that coffee was basically giving me
energy mhm and then it was actually
Daniel Arman Dr Daniel Arman that helped
me understand what's actually going on
right he says it's just like blocking
something yes it's it's it's stopping a
compound called adenosine working in
your blood and adenosine calms you down
lowers your heart rate makes you feel
tired and sleepy and caffeine just gets
in the way of that receptor and stops it
working so a lot of people experience a
kind of accumulation of adenosine and so
while they're consuming coffee their
body is trying to put out adenosine
lower the heart rate calm them down it's
not working and eventually your body
clears the caffeine and you have a kind
of Crash afterwards where you suddenly
just feel extremely tired because
finally your receptors are clear to
receive the amount of adenosine that's
in your blood so yeah there's there's a
kind of downside that way again big
doses tend to come with bigger crashes
you know I think a lot of people now are
pushing the idea that you should delay
caffeine consumption a little bit later
in the day uh I think huberman is big on
like no coffee for the first 90 120
minutes after waking to help sort of
mitigate this effect and sort of clear
out everything in your bloodstream
before you start inhibiting adenosine uh
reception is that why people get like
crashes and stuff like that because a
lot of drinks that are coming to market
now that are like caffeine based
products are promising you that you
won't get crashes and Jitters so I was
wondering if there right you see a lot
of people pushing alanine in there as a
product which seems to have a
synergistic effect and and help people
feel a little calmer while sort of
maintaining the benefits from that I
think the evidence is reasonable on that
but um again those products tend to be a
bit more sort of thoughtful about the
amount of caffeine in them and and I
think the amount of caffeine is really
kind of key you know um you might have
something with say 100 milligrams of
caffeine that's a that's a pretty
acceptable dose you might find that in a
single espresso or say a small cup of
filter coffee if you take a pre-workout
that's often 300 milligrams of caffeine
and so there's all these ways that we
can consume caffeine quite easily
Coca-Cola is pretty low I think like 50
60 milligrams of caffeine in a can or a
bottle of Coca-Cola but you can easily
end up drinking 200 250 milligrams in
coffee as well if it's a uh lower
quality coffee it tends to have more
caffeine in it if it's brewed it's a
sort of very strong filter coffee it's
just knowing how much you're taking that
I think is kind of key and why why does
that matter is that again about sleep or
is it just because if you take huge
doses then there'll be significant
consequences like crashes and stuff like
that yeah I think it's the more you dose
the longer it's going to take to clear
from your system the more that will be
in your blood come time to go to sleep
you know I think the the lethal dose of
of caffeine is really pretty high a few
people have got there sadly but it's
it's it's a huge amount of coffee it's
usually done with like pills or other
sort of forms of caffeine consumption to
do it with just cups of coffee is like I
think 50 or 60 cups of coffee in a very
time frame a very strong coffee would be
about what what was necessary for a
small person to hit sort of caffeine
toxicity so it's quite hard to do and
you die have a cardiovascular issue or I
think it's more unpleasant than that as
I recall yeah I think it's a sort of
neurological thing as well it's not I
don't think it's a good death if I'm
honest um not that you know maybe there
are good ones but yeah I don't think
it's a good way to
go coffee was originally a snack kind of
kind of yeah the coffee fruit was so uh
it's kind of most people don't think of
coffee as fruit and coffee fruit grows
on these trees they're usually about 2
met tall full of these sort of ripe red
cherry looking things we call them
coffee cherries they're about the size
of a grape but inside there's these two
seeds kind of like a peanut facing each
other and they take up most of the fruit
uh so if you eat them they're not very
satisfying they're mostly seed bit of
skin and a little bit of kind of fruit
flesh for want of a better term on the
inside but it is delicious it's kind of
like a Tangy watermelon taste coffee
fruits very delicious I recommend if you
can try it definitely try it um caffeine
exists in coffee primarily as an insect
repellent that's why the plant produces
it so that if an insect attacks the
fruit it gets a whack of caffeine and
it's like nope and it leaves the fruit
alone so that's its function in nature
other plants produce caffeine there's
some interesting stuff about how uh
caffeine improves the memory of bees
which helps with pollination as kind of
so some flowers produce caffeine uh and
they think for that reason but the the
caffeine in fruit in coffee trees
specifically is basically insect rep
which is why the higher you grow coffee
the less insects there are and actually
the lower the levels of caffeine you
tenden see the plant
produce you became
a competitive coffee I don't know what
do you call it do you call it a player
Barista Barista you became a competitive
coffee Barista when you were what 25
years old yeah about that yeah and then
by 27 you named the world Brea Champion
yes I I I think I went hard uh you know
a couple things yeah well I really fell
in love with it you know what I mean
like like I got into coffee at like 23 I
didn't like coffee didn't drink coffee
and then I wrot a book uh called The
Devil's cup that just this book yeah
yeah yeah and it's a fun book it's it's
I don't know how well it's aged but it's
just travel writing so he traces the
route that coffee took from Ethiopia to
Yemen through kind of uh turkey into the
Mediterranean how it's spread around the
world and what got me about that book
was like coffee is in every culture and
it's different Italian espresso culture
is totally different to Scandinavian
Coffee Culture totally different to
Australian Coffee Culture or you know
what Coffee Culture is in the us I was
like well this drink is kind of
interesting like it's a part of every
society now and then I started to drink
it I fell in love with it and I just
went deeper and deeper and deeper and um
yeah in 2007 I won the World withth
Championships so if you're the former
World barista champion yeah and I am a
muggle which I am on coffee and many
things what do I need to know what are
the like the biggest myths and
misconceptions about the drink of coffee
that someone like me should be aware of
of I'm trying to have better coffee I'm
not you know I'm not I'm never going to
be like a coffee snob but I'm I want to
make I want nicer coffees that are good
for me that are healthy um and that
taste great what do I need to know what
are the misconceptions there's there's
probably less misconceptions now than
ever I would say like the I think more
people are coming round to the idea that
coffee is not just a bitter painful
experience that you go through to get
the caffeine on the other side side like
it's a little trial each morning that we
come to enjoy I think people Now
understand more and more that there is
an astonishing sort of range of flavor
in
coffee 20 years ago there wasn't 40
years ago there was no diversity of
flavor in coffee coffee was brown and
mean and miserable and that was it and
now you can have coffees that taste kind
of fruity and floral you can have
coffees that taste earthy and rich or
chocolatey or whatever else like so I I
think the thing that I want to kind of
get out into the world is whatever you
enjoy I'm pretty sure there's something
could enjoy more because there's so much
out there there's so much diversity
that's the first thing I think the the
second
thing that I think people do understand
is
that you know coffee's kind of made
three times in a weird sort of way
coffee is made at the farm level and we
would understand that with wine like a
grower grows the grapes they make the
wine at that point and the producer of
raw coffee carefully grows fruit
harvests the seeds processes them
carefully and you can do a good job
there or a bad job and you've kind of
got a peak quality moment there coffee
is made again when you roast it it's
transformed completely from a kind of
green plant smelling thing into one of
the most aromatic things in the world
and then it's made again when you make
it and at each of these stages you can
lose the quality completely you can do a
terrible job roasting it make it taste
awful and you can do a terrible job
Brewing it and make it taste awful and I
think for a lot of people coffee making
was not particularly a skill coffee
making was not complex or hard and it
shouldn't be complex but it it's easy to
get wrong and I think you can be dis
appointed by a coffee that you've made
without really understanding why and a
lot of what I'm interested in is like
okay you don't need to understand
everything about this process you need
to work out what are the most important
things to understand and get those right
and then you're most of the way there I
don't think the the kind of average
consumer is necessarily uninformed or
confused but potentially overwhelmed by
choice still well I I see a variance in
the price so I assume there must be a
variance in what I'm putting in my mouth
or and I'm not sure what's marketing and
what's you know quality yeah um I've
brought five different cups of coffee
yes from five local shops Outlets Etc
and I'm going to I don't know which ones
are which so my team got me these five
cups of coffee Jack is just bringing
them in now so we have five different
cups of coffee here from five different
suppliers you're smelling them all when
you're smelling them is there anything
you're noticing just from smelling them
yeah like um
so one of the things I can assess pretty
quickly is how Darkly the coffee has
been roasted when you have uh the longer
you leave coffee in a roasting machine
the darker the color of the beans will
be and for a long time I think people
Associated darker roasts with with
better coffee Oiler beans looked kind of
fancier whereas it's swung the other way
and lighter roasts now are considered
better or more expensive because they
kind of preserve more of the inherent
qualities of the raw materials um so
these are all reasonably dark roasts
just from smell so I can kind of the
smells I'm coming off there are more in
the kind of heavy uh not burnt smells
well some of them actually smell a
little bit burnt and kind of uh harsh
but U nothing's particularly fruity or
floral smelling so it's just for me a
kind of gauge of where things are going
to be so there's going to be an
expectation with that of bitterness in
in perfume shops they give us sometimes
coffee beans to smell to kind of try and
wash out our nasal senses I guess does
that work yeah it totally does we we we
are it's why dogs sniff really fast that
you're looking for change your sense of
smell Works quite well on change
uh and so yes you will get what's called
suppression if you smell the same kind
of smells over and over they become less
and less intense it's why people end up
wearing too much of the same perfume
they've worn for 20 years because they
can't literally can't smell it anymore
we can they can't and it's also
evidenced when you go for a run and then
because you can smell yourself you have
to ask your friend if you smell so Dave
do I stink yeah cuz your brain your nose
I guess is habituated to them there's a
good hack if you ever want to break
apart how like something like Coca-Cola
smells if you take a component smell of
Coca-Cola like lime right cuz Coke just
tastes Coke to people but it's actually
lime naroli cinnamon orange nutmeg and
if you smell a bunch of cinnamon and
then smell Coke it smells weird because
you've deleted cinnamon from Coca-Cola's
FL like Aroma profile and you can do
that with say lime and smell and it's
like whoa I've thrown the balance out by
kind of deleting that and suppressing
that it's a dull but fun kind of trick
the interesting thing with talking about
Coca-Cola there is I remember those Coke
and Pepsi studies from back in the day
where people would rate Pepsi as tasting
better unless they had it in a Coke can
so when they could see the brand of the
Coca-Cola they rated it better but when
they could see it in a plastic cup they
rated Pepsi better and I wonder here as
well because you you don't know what
these coffees are you don't know what
brands they are neither do I yeah um
what the results are going to be so
coffee number one yes have a taste and a
smell
so that's a to me a pretty standard kind
of commercial coffee taste there's not a
lot going on there relatively high in
bitterness to me I say that's a fairly
bitter cup of coffee um and that's
coming I would say mostly from roast and
if something's good or bad it can be bad
because it wasn't made that well that
day it could be bad because it was not
great raw materials and finding why is
sometimes tricky I wouldn't say it's
particularly expensive cup of coffee no
it didn't taste it patol station coffee
you can say that I like that I you can
say yeah I'm gonna just lead you into
saying terrible things and I'll say
nothing yeah yeah that's it tasted like
it came out of like a um vending machine
or something to me yeah I'd be surprised
if that was expensive I'd be a little
bit outraged if that was expensive what
would you rate that one out of
five let's do
10 um for me and what coffee can be I'd
say that's like a two I would say that
was
a five out of 10 yeah think I think it's
kind of fair I probably should be fair
and call it a four out of 10 cuz I've
tasted way worse than that okay let's go
for number
two now this one would be a little bit
more divisive for a lot of people
because it's got a little bit more
acidity in it it's like a little bit re
describe salmonis almost like it's a
little zingy tasting generally acidity
is is associated with quality in coffee
which is a real sticking point for a lot
of people it's down to the fact that
when you grow coffee the higher you grow
it the slower it grows the the sweeter
it will ultimately be but you do get
more acidity in higher coffees some
people don't want that in their coffee
they really don't want sour coffee so
that tastes like it's got better raw
materials in there for me than this one
roast a little bit lighter bruise a
little bit better I'd like it to be a
less kind of sour thing it's a little
bit old obviously it's sat around for a
while but I would say it's a for me it's
a better cup than this one like it's got
a little it's got a little
characteristic to it like it tastes of
something that's a little bit fruity in
there yeah it's got a per more of a
personality hasn't it the aftertaste is
a little bit something going on there
mhm M and what' you rate that out of out
of 10 in your preference there's things
I'd like to change about it so like six
seven somewhere there like um but it has
I think better raw materials in it that
that does appeal to
me okay I'm going to say six as well
okay I can reveal
M that number one yes was MacDonald's
coffee that's not surprising that that's
kind of what I would have expecting
McDonald's to taste like and it was that
cup of coffee cost us
£130 so probably the cheapest thing here
feel like McDonald's are aiming at the
kind of Cheaper end okay your assessment
there was probably fair you did
originally give it a two out of 10 I I
feel not bad about that but it's fine
there you go so um number two you talked
about there being sort of a bitterness
to it and an little bit more acidity in
this tastes like the raw materials are
of a higher quality quity certainly the
number
one that is an independent local coffee
shop Y and that cup of coffee is double
the price of the McDonald's one at
about3 per cup let's move on to number
three
okay very different
taste for me it's more akin to number
one than anything else like it's again
it's a darker roast it's got a bit more
body to it feels a bit Fuller bit little
bit richer bit earthy at the same time
for
me
um it's Fuller isn't it it is a little
bit Fuller and the first one was quite
wry to me yeah and that's in part going
to be How It's Made in part how it's
roasted in part you know where it's from
um price-wise I wouldn't expect it to be
much more than the McDonald's if I'm
honest that that tastes again like a
um yeah like a a reasonbly commercial
grade coffee I wouldn't say it tastes
bad roast a little
dark yeah it's another kind
of um yeah 343 actually this is
something about the there's a sort of
earthiness that I don't enjoy in coffee
some people really like earthy flavors I
really don't and that's just a
preference thing so that is Costa Coffee
interesting there you go number
four you're doing a swirling I can see
you can do doing a real I try I like to
slurp usually do a little Iration but
Dan a microphone it's brutal um okay so
that's um probably the darkest roast of
all of them I would say it doesn't taste
like the raw materials are particularly
bad until I could have a guess at who
that's from um but it is definitely a
darker roast so more bitterness again
quite full um so you know my gut says
that's a sort of Starbucks style thing
to me try the last one as well then
before we reveal before I get into
trouble that's kind of weird um
it's a little bit Vegeta to me if I'm
honest um it's not it's not my favorite
again it's it's within the world of
coffee roasting it's darker it's not as
dark as this one yeah I like it probably
less than this one here so I'd probably
be back to like a four again so number
four which was the one you gave five out
of 10 is Pratt is it yeah wow and
number
three sorry number five yes is Starbucks
is it yeah there you go so of the High
Street chains then the coffee that you
rated highest in our taste test yeah was
Pratt yeah second was Costa and then
third was Starbucks but I would say from
my point of view the variance between
them surprisingly small yeah uh they're
not I don't think they taste
particularly different to each other in
a in a big way I think the independent
stood out a long way from the others
right it was clearly different it has a
lot more flavor and character going on
which is good which is what you know I I
like about coffee but um you know I
think the the
chains the brand experience may be
different but at the root there's not a
huge variance in the coffee experience I
agree I wouldn't really I mean there are
I can taste differences but but it's not
as a profound difference as the
McDonald's taste and then the
independent taste which was really full
of Personality yep and interestingly the
um the price Varian is the independent
cost £3 cost is 3 20 pret's 320 and
Starbucks is
£360 really yeah it always blew my mind
for years and years I would work with
loads of like essentially startup coffee
shop owners and their mindset would be
oh I need to be like the same kind of
price as Starbucks or maybe a little bit
more and you're like what are you
possibly thinking that you have the same
kind of supply chain that they do that
you're going to make and you know they
make great margins you you're not buying
20 million paper cups a week you know
what I mean like nothing makes sense but
people feel very tied to this idea that
you know the price is set by the chains
and I think that's changed now and
people are more comfortable charging
above that but for a long time people
were terrified to charge more than the
chains even if the product was
noticeably better and you know a real
frustration for me and and that's why
I'm always going to bat for Independence
because it's not like you can spend more
you can get a better product by someone
who cares deeply about it and and and I
think it's there's a risk in going to an
independent if you're traveling and you
know Starbucks the model is built on I
know where to Quee who to talk to where
to stand after I place an order what
kind of food I can get there it's very
safe if I dropped you in Moscow and told
you to get coffee you'd go to a chain
because you know how it works and You'
get it done Independence feel like a
risk but the reward I think is often
there for sure and there's more
Independence than they're better than
ever now so you know I'm I'm very Pro
independent coffee shops I want to talk
to you about one of our sponsors
LinkedIn job super quick because without
LinkedIn jobs the dire of a CO team
simply wouldn't exist how it is now I've
probably hired about 90% of our current
team through Linkedin and I wasn't just
looking for CVS as you've seen in my
posts I've never cared about CVS I was
looking for passion expertise dedication
and above all else kind people which
tends to be really hard to find on
jobsites typically but with LinkedIn
jobs you're not just getting a CV dump
it's like walking into the world's
biggest networking event if you're a
small business I get it we're juggling a
million things often without the luxury
of a HR department but LinkedIn makes
the hiring process intuitive smooth and
super efficient they've even rolled out
a new feature using AI to craft job
descriptions for you for greater
efficiency so here's my tip to you if
you're looking to hire the best
professionals make your life easier and
use LinkedIn jobs and right now for our
Dio Community you can post your job for
free at linkedin.com doac that's
linkedin.com doac terms and conditions
apply quick one we are working with an
exciting new sponsor on this podcast
Shopify I'm sure you guys have heard of
Shopify if you haven't been living under
a rock but for those that don't know
Shopify is a Commerce platform
revolutionizing millions of businesses
worldwide it is pretty incredible they
provide everything you need to start
your business and it's super simple to
get started and to get your business out
there here at the Dio we've used Shopify
for a variety of our different product
drops the latest being the conversation
cards and without the help of Shopify
that wouldn't have been possible it's
mine and my team's goto website for all
things Commerce related so I'm giving
you guys the chance to trial Shopify for
$1 that's right $1 sign up for a $1
trial for a month by searching
shopify.com
Bartlet all lower case keep it to
yourself and let me know how you get on
you you have H quite a lot of businesses
um I've read somewhere that you'd
started I think 11 or 12 different
companies getting on for that I think at
this point now what are what are those
businesses um it's a good question uh my
first business uh I started back in 2008
just after I won the world roast
championships um which was a Coffee
Roasting Company um and that still is I
suppose my primary business today even
if I don't run that anymore and there's
amazing MD in there and uh I just sort
of try not start fires and be useful
where I can do uh over the years we've
started other things uh distribution
companies kind of importing stuff or uh
we have a coffee shop we've done
training businesses kind of education
that kind of stuff uh equipment
businesses kind of the big commercial
espresso machines in there I started a a
coffee coffee recruitment business uh
that I ultimately sold a little while
back um I'm trying to think of other
I've started a magazine I've started a
bunch of other stuff and then this you
know getting into YouTube That's become
a weird business in and of itself that I
didn't plan to start but is now a kind
of all consuming business with with the
YouTube business you
must have learned a lot about what
people are interested in as it relates
to coffee because you'll see you talk
about certain things and people just
seem to gravitate towards those subject
matter
what what is it that people care so much
about as it relates to coffee and your
audience care about that's a great
question because I think coming into
this I I for years and years as people
did back then wrote A Blog and I wrote a
Blog to sort of share information about
coffee because it was great for me to
learn and also there's a benefit to
sharing I think if you give things come
back to you in the world and then people
stop reading blogs and started making
videos and I think having worked in the
coffee industry for 20 years we had
tried to talk to people about coffee and
nothing really hit and people weren't
really interesting they didn't like the
way we talked about it and suddenly
YouTube I found a way to connect with
people and it turns out we vastly
underestimated how broad and how deep
people's interest in coffee is yeah
people care about which machine should I
buy and that remains a question that I
will be asked I think for the end of my
days EXC me which
machine no I'm genuinely want to know
which machine I should buy because well
I don't know it depends what your needs
are like what's your budget like what do
you want to spend what kind of
experience do you want right like but I
love an espresso and I want I like speed
and I want I mean I'm like everybody I
want it to be super fast and really nice
so the problem with espresso
specifically okay is that good espresso
is a little bit tricky and it means to
get really great espresso at home you
kind of want to have it as a hobby and
if that does not appeal to you then
don't get an espresso machine for home
because you will spend a ton of money
and you I can get you the best machine
in the world put it on your counter
after a week you be like I just can't be
bothered I don't want to do this
and I think suddenly the £253 that the
Independent Business charges you you're
like oh that's great I will happily pay
you to go through the pain of making
espresso because it's messy it's slow
it's convoluted It's Tricky it's
frustrating and as a hobby really
rewarding but as a way to caffeinate
yourself in the morning not the best
what about an Americano like a great
Americano like a great filter coffee
yeah there's there's definitely options
there and and you can
buy a machine and grinder and spend
what you can get an incredible setup for
like 500 bearing in mind espresso
machines an incredible setup will be two
three 4,000 if you're looking at that
like the top end of stuff you can go all
the way up to I can spend 10 10 15,000
of your money if you let me Jesus uh if
that's that's where the budget sort of
top out in in home espresso but it's
kind of at that point it's like home
home audio where people just they want
the best possible thing and if they have
the budget that market exists I'm moving
into a new house so I'm like right in
the now of thinking about how to solve
this morning coffee problem so I'm
trying to find something I can maybe
install and and the thing with me is I
don't I ain't got a huge amount of time
so I kind of just want an iPad I ideally
I'd just speak to it and say please give
me coffee and it would just come out you
know yeah we're not there yet we're not
there yet the coffee industry is
improving and the automation side is
improving by and large this sort of
super automatic stuff where you just
push a button and everything happens and
coffee comes out there's a bunch of dull
technical challenges that mean they
can't make as good a coffee as you could
do if you were willing to do a little
bit of work I thought so and that's I'm
not going to lie to you that's just the
truth of it they're getting better and
there are more and more solutions um and
there's some great High kind of
convenience uh solutions to coffee but
if you want to have fresh coffee made at
home and it to be as good as possible
I'm going to ask you to do tiny bits of
work just just pour beans in a grinder
put grinder ground coffee into a little
machine and push a button which machine
well it depends on your aesthetic at
this point then right like there's some
really nice filter coffee it depends how
much coffee you need like how much how
much do you need in the morning I've got
say I've got 1002 200 to solve this
coffee problem in total in total for the
Machinery okay so the bad news is is
that good and bad news coffee grinders
are the the right investment right uh
they are more important than the machine
you can give me a 20 quid filter coffee
brewer from Amazon but if you give me a
decent grinder I can get some pretty
good coffee out of it if you give me a
20b coffee grinder and a 5 grand machine
I can make pretty terrible coffee
average coffee at best right so the
grinder how how it cuts the coffee
essentially you'll often see people have
little whirly blade Grinders you push it
but it spins madly just smashes it to
Pieces but there's no real control of
the size of the pieces so some will be
tiny particles other'll be big rocks
really hard to evenly Brew tiny pieces
the same way You' brew a massive piece
of coffee and so you get a kind of
bitter sour coffee as a result of it
good coffee grinders have spinning discs
inside that cut to a specific size so
all the coffe is pretty much the same
size mostly and that's much easier to
work with but they cost more money
because they need better Motors and
nicer cutting discs and that kind of
stuff not crazy amounts
but yeah you're looking at like at least
100 to 200b for a good grinder okay and
I'd love to tell you it wasn't the case
and grinders are getting it used to be
like 500 for a good grinder at home it's
coming down all the time uh but yeah i'
would say I'd need like 150 okay maybe
off you okay and then I can get you a
really great grinder that should last a
lifetime and make you cafe quality
coffee it's not it's not you know it
just couldn't do it 500 times a day the
way a coffee shops one could but that's
where you're going to spend money and
then you could just get a simple
pourover cone a little and just pour
water uh onto coffee on top of a mug and
life be really easy that way going back
to this point though about what you've
discovered about people's interest in
coffee from the YouTube Journey the
first thing you said there was people
want to know what machines and stuff and
I interrupted so please do no no I mean
for for me the strategy initially was so
I I my bigger umbrella goal of YouTube
is that I want people to enjoy coffee
more for a bunch of reasons and I want
them to see it as a more valuable piece
of their life so that at some point they
might be willing to spend a bit more
money on it that's that's the sort of
Topline goal what I'm then trying to do
is find them and reviews are to sort of
find people someone will be like which
is the best disor machine to buy they
find me if I entertain them uh if I
build trust with them I hope they'll
keep watching and then I can take them
on a journey uh into coffee and I can
open up new kind of avenues of
exploration for them that's the kind of
goal that's what I'm trying to do so in
part we do that through machiner reviews
and Equipment reviews in part through
kind of techniques if youve got a French
press cfer what is the best way to use
that I want to be there to help you do
that but it's it's a lot of it's about
building trust so that down the line
we can go and talk about something
totally different and you'll listen and
you'll trust me and and that sort of
trust is super important to me in in
terms of like building an audience um
because coffee has this really
depressing future uh climate change is
bad for coffee really really bad and to
some extent maybe we don't deserve to
have coffee after we've ruined the
planet I'd hear that argument but as
temperatures increase around the world
coffee needs cooler temperatures to grow
and the only way you can get cooler
temperatures as the world heats up is to
go higher up the mountain it's already
Mountain grown it's already growing at,
1500 M 2,000 M the problem with
mountains is that the higher you go
there's generally less of the mountain
you know I mean there's less area around
the world that can grow specialty coffee
grow great quality coffee so the future
is there'll be less great coffee in the
future cheap coffee will be around for a
while it doesn't need the same kind of
conditions but great coffee has a
difficult future ahead of it and there
are millions of people whose livelihoods
depend on that and and that's it's not a
great system so to speak it's like
there's a lot of problems with how
coffee production uh is incredibly
unfair towards the people who produce it
but if we are to remain customers we
need to be comfortable spending a little
bit more on coffee in the future and if
you enjoy coffee spending an extra pound
a bag two pounds a bag if you really
enjoy it fine no problem at all you know
what I mean I will keep coffee as a part
of my life but but uh that that's kind
of one of the motivating factors for me
I want more people to enjoy it just cuz
I like bringing pleasure to people like
w that's great you know what I mean but
in the future I I want coffee consumers
to still be there through the challenges
that coffee production faces what about
these pods the coffee pod machines that
a lot of people are um using and that
are getting more and more popular wake
up in the morning grab the Pod whack it
in there boom hit button drink out comes
coffee yeah um the best analogy I can
make is the they're a microwave meal
and microwave meals are what they are
they are over quality they are super
convenient there's a fair amount of
waste attached to them and um you could
probably do better with a little bit of
effort and it would cost you less do you
do you use those pods not really not the
like there are some and there that are
kind of separate and different I don't
want to get into right now um I think a
lot of the sort of small espresso kind
of style capsule ones are very popular I
just wish they were a bit more more
recyclable there's a bit of waste
associated with those but ultimately
they're very expensive actually for what
you're you're paying a lot of money for
that and you're paying for the
convenience I think that for the same
price per kilo you could buy some of the
best coffees in the world for what
you're spending on a capsule because you
you're spending money for five grams of
coffee because that's what it is uh but
the convenience is is very strong and
it's been so success I can't argue with
convenience we love a little
convenience but the possibility of of
quality
is far greater once you move Beyond
those you know what I mean like anytime
we go convenience we have to sacrifice
something and it's usually quality and
it's usually value ultimately we're
going to pay more for that convenience
so I get it I get not wanting to make
espresso but wanting something like
espresso in the mornings they've really
succeeded in sort of filling that market
but they are to me still a kind of
microwave meal is there any culture that
doesn't drink coffee
no everyone drinks everyone drinks
coffee people have tried to ban it a few
times it was seen as a kind of seditious
drink that kind of uh sort from a
political perspective they tried to ban
it here in the UK briefly I think King
James I want to say tried to ban it
doesn't last very long we tend to get
pretty grumpy if you try and ban it uh
it had a sort of they asked the pope to
ban it at one point and he was like no
it's great and so he he didn't do that
that was hundreds of years ago but yeah
coffee was often linked to uh politics
in the early days so London was the
greatest coffee drinking city in the
world for a while from 16 late 1600s
coffee just comes here to the city of
London and takes over because up until
that point we were drinking a lot of
weak beer that was the sort of safe uh
high calorie high B vitamin kind of
drink that we drunk and we were all a
little bit drunk most of the time from
drinking a couple liters or three liters
of weak Beer a Day coffee arrives and
it's this safe drink that is totally the
opposite to beer it is stimulating and
it transforms London Society over the
time and uh we get obsessed with it
coffee houses appear everywhere there is
the story that in the square mile in the
early 1700s there were 2,000 coffee
shops now that's that's excessive it
wasn't that many it was probably but it
was several hundred like they were
everywhere and they quickly Diversified
and sort of specialized into specific
things and so uh very famously Lloyds of
London the insurance broker started as a
coffee shop called Lloyds of London and
people did business at the tables those
became offices and to this day runners
in there are still called waiters and
and so that just happened to specialize
in shipping insurance that coffee house
others specialized in politics others
specialized in literature they became
known as Penny universities because you
could pay a penny to get into a London
coffee house and you would gain the
education just from listening to people
talk of a University degree and so they
were these incredible places for a while
uh eventually our Colonial interest
shifted to tea and the coffee house went
into the decline in sort of 1700s 1800s
but for about a 100 years London was the
most incredible coffee drinking city in
the
world when coffee came to the UK MH and
when it came to the Western world was
there productivity boom yeah 100% uh
huge change in culture massive because
we were no longer drunk all the time um
so yeah it arrives in London I think in
1652 it's the first uh coffee shop
that's right just near Bank Tube Station
you can see a little blue plaque on the
wall if you go looking for there and
yeah we we absolutely fell in love with
it it became a part of Industry culture
politics everything like it it
supercharged the nation there are people
who argue that are you know we we awake
from this drunken stuper and then are
like well what's the rest of the world
got to offer and we go and become the
colonial you know horror show that we
were after that and you can blame coffee
for that but that's bit of a stretch but
uh yeah it was a massive shift in
society I I think for most of my life
assumed that tea didn't have caffeine in
it I don't know why I just always
thought coffee caffeine I think cuz they
sound similar yeah yeah yeah yeah but
then I I I heard at one point that tea
also has caffeine in it as well a little
bit nowhere near the quantities uh of
coffee but you know if you're drinking
10 12 Cups of Tea a day it's probably
worth paying attention to how much is in
there and how you steep your tea and all
that kind of stuff will have an impact
on how much caffeine's in there and
what's your what's your favorite cup of
coffee you get mustus asked this all the
time I do get ask this all the time and
I still after 20 years don't have a
great answer I drink a lot of filter
coffee uh what is filter coffee so
filter coffee is not from an espresso
machine so it's going to be brewed
either in a filter coffee machine or by
hand you'll see a lot of people pouring
water over coffee uh the drink is going
to be the same kind of strength as an
Americano but it's a sort of it's a it's
a weaker thing I'm I'm not obsessed with
espresso the same way I want a cup of
black coffee because I want to take my
time because as you taste a cup of
coffee if it's a great cup of coffee as
it cools down it's it's flavor kind of
opens up and becomes really interesting
and complex and so I like the idea that
I can sit for 10 15 minutes and if I
want to have a really enjoyable kind of
Journey of flavor that for me is is the
the kind of great bit about coffee yeah
I'll drink an espresso sometimes if I
want a little short shot of something
tasty but but the idea that I can if I
want have 10 15 minutes to myself to
enjoy this thing and see some benefits
afterwards that's a wonderful thing so I
like coffees from all over the
world I feel like I'm forcing myself
into a a tiny space here if I could only
drink coffee from one country for the
rest of my life it would probably be
coffees from Columbia uh they just have
a real spread of flavors but some really
just incredible coffees come from that
part of the world but there's amazing
coffee from just just about every
producing country if you're within the
Tropic of uh cancer and the Tropic of
Capricorn that kind of belt around the
earth then you can probably grow coffee
above certain altitudes and almost every
country that is in that band does grow
coffee so there's a lot of different
places that grow it um and there's going
to be great coffee in all of those
places and they'll be cheap low quality
coffee in all those places too but yeah
there's the range that the spread is
massive do you pour sugar and milk into
your coffee I don't use sugar and milk
and I get why people do because most
coffee benefits from sugar and milk milk
is a very uh it has a weird Quirk it's a
bitter blocker it inhibits bitterness so
when you put it into a harsh bitter cup
of coffee it does soften that we of
course like sweet things I think uh one
thing to note when it comes to all of
the studies that look at coffee and is
coffee healthy
they'll be like yes coffee is healthy if
you drink it black and if you putting a
lot of cream and a lot of sugar into
your coffee there are the health
benefits very quickly taken away you
know what I mean it's it's not quote
unquote as healthy a drink for me
putting milk or sugar into coffee kind
of hides the flavors a little bit and so
I I I want to taste it without I get why
people want to put it in there I don't
have an issue with people sweetening or
or adding a little milk or cream but you
kind of
lose some of what makes coffee so
interesting
in this book yes how to make the best
coffee at home one of the points you
make is quite surprising you say that
once a um cuz I used to think that
coffee was a shelf staple mhm I used to
think you get it you can grind it you
can put it in the cupboard and it kind
of lasts forever yeah and it doesn't
change you make the case that I'm wrong
it is sadly not the case it's fresh food
unfortunately Ely the the challenge
coffee has is that we just can't see it
change if I disp an apple and I leave it
for a couple of hours you can see the
change in it it's staling in a bunch of
different ways when you smash coffee
into little pieces when you grind it to
find powder you Kickstart a bunch of
chemistry that you can't undo and some
of that's oxidation where oxygen
transforms things and turns fats a
little bit rancid over time you lose a
bunch of the Aromas locked inside the
bean it just gets less interesting
tasting if you want the best experience
for coffee cfee grinding it fresh is is
the way to do it also grinding coffee is
one of the like the best smells in the
world why would you not have that as
part of your life uh and so yeah coffee
is fresh food and if you treat it like
fresh food it tastes way better how long
does it take to
Decay it's a good question so if I had
it in the in the cupboard you
know once you grind
coffee most people would easily detect a
difference a day later and they would
say it tasted notably worse two days
later and so buying pre-round coffee is
buying High convenience but the cost is
you never got to experience how good
that coffee was at the moment it was
ground so if I buy it in supermarkets
yeah it's going to taste awful compared
to in a coffee shop yeah you get a lot
less for your money in terms of flavor
it will have degraded they can gas flush
it and they'll you know pack the bags
within gases and stuff but the minute
you open that bag it's on its way out
and it will happen really quickly and so
the downside is coffee grinders cost a
little bit of money and they take up a
little bit of space and they're another
step in the morning between you and
getting your caffeine in the system I
understand that but if you want the best
value for money a bag of beans costs the
same as a bag of ground coffee even
though the ground coffee has more cost
in terms of manufacturer but the value
of the beans is just way higher it just
tastes way better and so having a
grinder lets you get better value for
money in the coffee that you buy going
forwards what do you think the future of
coffee is we've talked a little bit
about the of coffee but where where you
think the coffee industry and public
opinion around coffee goes from
here you know I think we've Fallen
pretty deeply in love with coffee in a
different kind of way in the last few
years I think the the
pandemic caused a seismic shift in
coffee consumption around the world
people had grown used to going out to
coffee shops drinking good quality
coffee and and that was part of their
lives and when the pandemic happened and
people couldn't do that the growth grow
in coffee equipment at home was
astronomical this was this was something
people wanted to invest in and were not
willing to let go of I I wasn't really
sure pre- pandemic he said how much
people really love coffee I'm like well
they like it a lot but you know maybe
they'd let it go if it got too expensive
but in that moment where we took it away
people were like absolutely not coffee
stays and and and that was really
heartening to me and that was all over
the world every every Market every
country I spoke to people they saw the
same thing huge interest in coffee at
home so I feel good about that I feel
like the the promise of specialty coffee
where we where we
said you know the promise of specialty
coffee where we said coffee can be
better it's a bit more expensive but it
tastes more interesting people have
enjoyed that and found that to be true
so right now I feel very good about
coffee consumption from a uh longevity
point of view for the industry people
want to keep drinking coffee like I said
the The Challenge on one side remains
coffee Productions future it's going to
be be increasingly difficult to grow
great quality coffee in the future with
climate change we're already seeing the
impact of that now and changing rainfall
patterns all sorts of other stuff is
making coffee harder to grow that's
going to put the price of it up in the
future for the high quality stuff but
for a while I I think it will sort of
stay I don't think we're willing to let
go I think we are going to be paying
more attention to caffeine in the future
and I think that's a good thing I would
encourage people to pay more attention
to caffeine in the future and that may
decrease our consumption overall and I'm
also okay with that too I'd rather
people spent good money on two great
cups of coffee a day than just five
average ones just to get them through
like I I'm okay with lowering
consumption and increasing the quality
of it that works very well for me uh
because I think it will bring more
pleasure to people ultimately they enjoy
the coffee they drink more it's not this
mindless cheap thing they endlessly
consume it's a moment of pleasure and I
think it can be this moment of absolute
delight and interest and pleasure if you
were looking for your moment of pleasure
walking through the Streets of London
yes where would would you turn which
shop would you go into I mean we're
talking about coffee here when I say
moment of pleasure just just in case you
you thought
no um where would you turn because I'm
walking through London all the time and
as a muggle I look up and I go okay all
these logos they're all saying coffee
where should I be should I be going for
random independent and rolling the dice
should I be going to a chain what's your
POV London has some of the best
independent coffee shops in the world
you know like and that's true of most
major cities now like incredible coffee
is in is very available now if you know
where to look and I guarantee that's the
tricky bit knowing in advance by and
large though there's enough written
about on the internet if you search best
specialty coffee in whatever city you'll
find a great list of 20 that will be a
good experience it might be a bit more
expensive but it will be I think a
better coffee experience I get I I buy
coffee from chains when I have to I get
that but given the choice I would love
to go and visit an independent business
see someone's expression you know what I
mean someone's aesthetic someone's Vibe
someone's experience it can be different
and why wouldn't I want to explore
different and new so I think it's just
an opportunity for Discovery loads of
like U bands that tore the world get
obsessed with coffee because it's a
great way to explore a city it's a great
way to kind of find the new
neighborhoods and just check places out
and just have something fun and
enjoyable in the day and I think coffee
is a great way to explore new cities and
you talk to people who work in great
coffee shops they'll recommend you the
best bars the best restaurants like that
network is so easy to tap into there
that it it's the the best hack if you
throw me in a random City I'll find a
good coffee shop and ask the question
where should I eat the best bakery got
to challenge for you here okay I throw
you into a random City let's just call
that City London Y and I put you in
front of all of the chains yes they're
all the same distance from your feet
yeah which one does James walk
towards and why really difficult
question if I'm honest if you made me
buy a a coffee drink I assume I have to
buy a coffee drink right is that mu
muffin and sparkling water and run away
um you have to get your favorite coffee
from one of these that's much harder cuz
otherwise I'd go to like Starbucks and
get like a dessert in a cup and go
because there's you know there's enough
sort of fat and sugar in there it's a
good time you know what I mean like I
can't deny there's a little bit of
delight in little
Frappuccino
um well I like filter coffee and so by
and large I would typically probably end
up at a Starbucks cuz they're one of the
few that do filter coffee where it's
sort of brewed as filter coffee distinct
and different from an Americano uh and
sometimes you can be mean and ask them
to make a specific coffee and they have
to do that for you if you ask just right
uh so that would be the The Lazy answer
to that you walk into the Starbucks what
you say
uh if I'm being fully weird be fully
weird fine then I'm going to look world
I'm going to look at the tanks they'll
have two tanks of like filter coffee
prepped they'll have timers counting
down on them which is how old they are
because the longer filter coffeee sits
the worse it tastes and so I'm going to
look for the one that has the longest
time left on the tank before they have
to throw it away and I'm going to get a
small cup or what is it the kind a tall
is it who knows uh a tall cup of that
filter coffee because it's going to be
the freshest brewed thing that they have
and that's my kind of answer it's a bit
weird to start looking at timers though
but once you notice it you'll see them
sitting there interesting so you walk in
you you look at the timers and then you
make a request to have the one that's
freshest yes cuz I would rather have say
a darker roast enjoy as much that's
fresher than a lighter roast that's been
sitting around a couple hours or
something like that I don't know what
that kind remember what their use times
is it might be an hour hour and a half I
want it fresher than that so that's
that's my thing I think in a lot of
Starbucks if you ask them to make a
French press for you they they still
have to do that um so yeah there like an
option this like an off menu option some
have said yes over the years some have
just been like straight no uh but that
was a good little hack for a while but
yeah by and large I'll get filter coffee
from the freshest pot that they have
what is your sleep like pretty good I
work hard at that though like I I pay a
lot of attention to sleep because it's
it's important to me and it's important
for future me and I'm trying to do a
better job I'm old enough now that
future me is an important thing uh in my
20s future me was not very important to
me I'm in my 40s I've got to think
differently you seem like a very
obsessive person I wouldn't say
obsessive I would would disagree you're
so you're so passionate is a better word
you're starting lots of businesses you
probably got more ideas than you have
hours in the day comfortably you remind
myself in that there's a cost to this
Obsession yes what is the cost
uh yeah I I think
um probably like uh if you stopped me
and said what do you do for fun I'd have
to stop and think about that for quite a
long time because it's a really tricky
question of like oh wait what do I what
do as I work and I do coffee things and
then I sleep and then you know there's
like whatever home life oh yeah I've
sort of sacrificed a little bit of that
and I don't think I have a hobby if that
makes sense like I I I think that's
probably not unusual in in a certain uh
group of people but yeah I do sometimes
think the the the kind of feeling of
like I've got so much to do all the time
I think a lack of space would probably
be my loss and and I don't know what I'd
do with it if I had time to do nothing
but I occasionally grieve emptiness in
the
day as you play your your life forward
are you mentally planning to make some
adjustments to the way that you're
living now as you look forward into the
future cuz I always think I'm doing that
I think in 5 years time or in 10 years
time I'll do this I'll sell this thing
and I'll just be a little bit more chill
a little bit more chill yeah yeah I've
been lying to myself that way for 15
years um I would love to I think part of
me knows that I enjoy what I do and I
and if I sold all my businesses tomorrow
I just start another one and and and
that's going to happen for a while and
maybe if I get older like it changes you
know what I mean I'm like oh maybe I'm
done doing this whole thing but it's
it's it's the part of of you learns that
these can be fun like the game is fun uh
of making things creating things and
then growing these things it's just fun
so yeah I'd love to I think for me I'd
love to just find more time for stuff
like exercise and that kind of stuff
investing there and you could argue and
probably should argue that I should be
doing that now because how is what is
more important than health what is more
important than health and the answer is
nothing is more important than health so
why am I not making the time for the
additional cardio and making the time
you know to get a little bit lifting a
little bit more hit in why am I not
making that time now there's no good
reason well I am starting to now like
I'm I'm resting with it enough I'm like
fine I'm going to make my life even more
complex squeeze my day even shorter and
I will find the time um you know Peter
AER has broken my brain too you know it
happens to all of us but like um yeah I
definitely go through the thing of like
yeah I will do this I'll spend less time
on this stuff I'll have more time I'll
do yoga I'll spend you know more time on
myself in the future but I think I know
I love what I do I really enjoy it and
it changes all the time and know one day
is the same as the next and I love that
and I can cope with that if your kids
come to you though your two young kids
and they say Daddy I want career advice
yeah based on the journey that you've
been on yourself and the path that
you've walked when you look back at the
sort of the key components of the
success you've achieved in a very
specific industry what advice would you
give to them I think lean into the
things that genuinely interest you
because there's opportunities in
everything even if it's like pen Lids or
I don't know 100% if genuinely
passionate about it then there's
opportunity there coffee was not a a
growth industry no one was proud that
their kid worked in coffee in the early
2000s you know I mean like oh they're
doing that before they get the next job
in the thing or they're doing that to
pay themselves through here to work in
coffee was
not like a career that was a weird thing
to think then I loved it and I was
encouraged in it and given opportunity
in it it and I flourished in it and so
for me whatever the future of work holds
I think creativity and empathy are
important parts of that and passion is
another piece of it and I hope they have
the opportunity to be passionate about
something and you know I figure that's
what your 20s are for right like find
the thing you're excited about and then
in your 30s do it do it really well uh
don't do it stupidly like I did like I
did I fell for the whole hustle grind
nonsense and I worked too many hours and
I nearly hated the thing that I loved
cuz that's what culture was then was
like you've got to work every hour and
if you're not sleeping under your desk
what are you even doing which is a lie
and stupid and deeply unhealthy in my
opinion but you know uh I you know that
was when my career really took off and
yeah I'd won this world BR Championship
thing in my 20s but nobody cared in the
UK nobody cared there was no no one was
impressed by that if I was the world's
best sandwich maker that was a career
but coffee whatever different now but
but you know yeah I I feel
like I think people know that now
there's more time to just kind of work
out what you want to do and that's okay
to not
be getting stuck into the perfect thing
right away like it's okay to mess around
and find out what you like or what you
don't like I did a bunch of terrible
jobs too I worked in casinos I sold gas
and electric door too I worked in music
publishing and I hated all of them and
that was great because now I know what I
don't want to do when you think about
particularly though your success in this
industry cuz some people will have
passion they won't be able to become the
number one world Breer Champion when you
reflect and do kind of a skills audit of
yourself yeah what what do you pull out
of there and go that's the reason why I
was able to go so far in this particular
industry I think I had a lot of practice
at communication that's what I was going
to one of the things I really noticed
about you is your communication skills
so I had dual practice one as I said I
wrote this blog which was about
digesting information well enough to
explain it back to someone else and so
that was a great process for me secondly
I had a weird job where I was training
uh I was kind of national training
manager for an espresso machine company
and in the back of my car had a
commercial machine projector screen like
I was a mobile Cafe and I would travel
the whole UK build out a kind of Set uh
travel the whole UK build out a lecture
room lecture to 30 random people for
three hours pack it down and go to the
next city or next town or whatever else
and so it was it was public speaking of
A Sort uh with a totally cold audience
who did not care or really be that
interested can you win them over can you
communicate can you teach them that was
an incredible two years of my life of
doing that every week trying what age oh
that was 25 26 and I was a terrible
public speaker beforehand and now I love
it I love being on stage I love that
kind of communication and it helps to
make videos and it helps to talk to
people and it helps to kind of chew your
thoughts before you spit them out again
and uh yeah isn't that just everything
like communication isn't it you know if
I was thinking if I had young kids now
what what the most useful
thing I think I could do for them is to
give them some kind of repetition-based
sales experience I spent four years
working in call centers on the phone
yeah it's no surprise to me now that I
I'm a podcaster and I've done sales and
I've done I raise investment and I tell
stories and I speak all around the world
and I've been all around the world this
week speaking and I go well those four
years working on those phones where I
made no money was the essence of the
development of that skill but I think
it's also realizing whether you did it
consciously or not that skill is rooted
in empathy that skill is rooted in not
in a script but seeing who you've got on
the other end and and building something
building a conversation around who they
are the kind of customization of
communication that comes with empathy
and that's kind of why I love the
service industry and and and encourage
people to spend time working in cafes or
restaurants because it's a great place
to have to read people all the time what
do they need right now because that's
what a coffee shop should be it should
be reliable vendor of happiness you
should walk in that building and walk
out happier in a better mood happier
that's the kind of key thing but that's
require that requires someone on the
other side looking at you and being like
what do you need today and not just
asking you that but do you want a
conversation do you want to know about
the coffee or do you want me to just
shut up and make it as fast as I can
that empathy piece that reading of
people is so important and such a great
skill that you can take out of
hospitality into whatever else you want
to do and I don't think Hospitality
really kind of advertises that aspect of
it enough when I look at you if I was to
do a skills audit I'd say clearly an
incredibly hard worker that's going to
be a great Tailwind through through your
career um curiosity huge amount of
curiosity which I think kind of couples
up with the word learning that you used
at the start you love to learn yeah and
your wealth of knowledge because of that
curiosity is huge your ability to then
articulate what you know and what you've
learned and what you've condensed I
think is a huge one but not just
articulate it tell stories that are like
compelling in in a comp way the way you
speak the intonations all of that keeps
people with you um and then yeah I guess
the repetitions of like the craft itself
like knowing how to make great coffee
Yourself by actually spending a long
time doing it which is different from
being a parrot like practitioners and
parrots are two separate things sure
you're clearly a practitioner and a
great like not parent because you're not
repeating things you you've learned
these things yourselves but you're a
great talker but also a great
practitioner that's very kind of you and
then you've got 20 years behind you and
[__] me 20 years of doing anything you
can you know you become a master so yeah
that's my assessment and then you're
like a likable individual you're very
likable guy you got nice constant your
resting face is a smirk I like a smile
which is endearing I think I'm broadly
happy you seem like a happy guy so I
don't think I have any reason not to be
yeah what is um what is the message to
the world then the closing message to
the world about coffee if you had to
give one if you were speaking to
everyone on planet Earth right now and
you had to just give them a few couple
sentences this is your megaphone to the
entirety of the world 8 billion people
if you want it to be coffee is really
great fun I if you are willing to put in
a little tiny bit I guarantee you will
get way more out however you enjoy your
coffee whatever you enjoy about coffee
it's got more to give and and it's I
promise a ton of
fun that's what I walk away here with as
many with all the other insights into
you your life coffee itself the big
thing I walk away from this conversation
with is an increased excitement about
coffee good I hope to uh fan the Flames
of that after this yeah and I'm really
going to I really no I really mean that
I'm I feel like I'm you might have just
sent me on my own little coffee Journey
oh come and have coffee with me
somewhere we'll go and get a bunch of
stuff we do a little coffee tasting for
you and see what you really like I know
you've got no time so that's not a real
invite but thank you% it is I'm just up
the road from here like anytime we'll do
it I appreciate that I'll take you up on
that all right okay so we we have a
closing tradition on this podcast where
the last guest leaves a question for the
next guest and I cannot believe I have
to ask you this bloody question I'm
ready you will you will think I'm lying
when I read this
okay but I have to read it because
that's my job I'm ready no you're not
okay what is the duration of your
nighttime
erections did you just have Brian
Johnson on here is that is that from
Brian Johnson um I don't know Brian the
little device was sold out by the time I
saw it yeah uh I I yeah I don't know we
should all be finding out apparently
neither do I I mean Jesus Christ that's
not going to make the conversation cards
that question [__] sck Brian um but
thank you so much do you know what these
books are just absolutely beautiful
thank you very much these have you have
you just done two of them or is there
more the atlas is a second edition now
and then the other one just came out the
world atlas of coffee is one of the most
beautiful books I've ever seen in my
life and it's got they did a great job
beautifully Rich um Photography in it
lots of History all of the equipment
questions that I've been asking you
about so if anyone really wants to
understand coffee oh I tell you what get
someone a great book if they're a coffee
fan that is the book that is absolutely
gorgeous and then the second book how to
make the best coffee at home I mean we
we we touched on this a little bit but
it goes into such great muggle detail
because even as an idiot I can
understand all of this stuff um as to
how to build your own little home setup
and the process that is important to
great coffee that is right yeah the
first one was kind of written as a guide
book is coffee got big and weird and
confusing and and there was just a lot
of information suddenly I kind of wrote
the first one as a guide book to this
new wave of coffee and the second one
really is people have embraced coffee at
home I just want to make it as easy as
possible by focusing on the stuff that
matters and not all the kind of Voodoo
or weird sort of uh odd Traditions
around that and just the stuff that
really makes a difference you didn't
have to make them so beautiful but
they're such beautiful books throughout
so I'm going to link them both in the
description below for anyone that wants
to check them out thank you James thank
you so much it's been a pleasure I feel
inspired really enjoyed this thank you
and I I'm excited to go and get a
wonderful MacDonald's coffee immediately
after this conversation's done so thank
you thank
you a quick word on hu as you know
they're a sponsor of this podcast and
I'm an investor in the company it is
finally here 3 years of work from hu to
try and make a bar a snack bar that is
nutritionally complete as of the
recording of this episode they finally
released these bars that are high in
protein 27 vitamins and minerals and
just 2 gram ofar sugar The Impossible
has been done and it tastes so godamn
good often these snack bars these like
high protein snack bars taste like
you're eating Play-Doh or cardboard or
something it's so hard to make one that
is nutritionally complete and that
tastes good and ladies and gentlemen
here we have it I'm going to put the
link in the description to get your bar
below try it out and tag me and let me
know exactly how you get on because it's
so nice to finally have a bar that is
nutritionally complete and that actually
doesn't taste like cardboard and that
tastes delicious
The Impossible has been
accomplished do you need a podcast to
listen to next we've discovered that
people who liked this episode also tend
to absolutely love another recent
episode we've done so I've linked that
episode in the description below I know
you'll enjoy
[Music]
it